# nicl_q1


<!-- WARNING: THIS FILE WAS AUTOGENERATED! DO NOT EDIT! -->

The nicl package is a suite of code for studies of Intracluster Light,
primarily intended for use by the Nottingham ICL group and
collaborators. While we aim for many elements to be applicable to a
range of datasets, a substantial section of the current code is focussed
on Euclid data. This nicl_q1 repository contains a branch of our main
(currently private) nicl repository, which captures the state of nicl
development at the time we processed the Euclid Q1 data. The details of
the processing and measurement approach are presented in Euclid
Collaboration: Bamford et al. (2026). These measurements have been used
in the following papers: - Euclid Collaboration: Kolcu et al. (2026) -
Euclid Collaboration: Golden-Marx et al. (2026) - Euclid Collaboration:
Gully et al. (2026)

## Structure and caveats

The code is implemented in notebooks located in the [“nbs”
folder](https://github.com/IntraClusterLight/nicl_q1/tree/main/nbs). The
functions defined in these notebooks are automatically exported by
[nbdev](https://nbdev.fast.ai) (v2) to produce the library in the
[“nicl”
folder](https://github.com/IntraClusterLight/nicl_q1/tree/main/nicl).
The notebooks can therefore use code defined in each other by importing
the pip-installed library, i.e. `import nicl`. Many notebooks also
contain examples illustrating the development and usage of the library
functions. The “nicl” folder can also contain additional python code
that is not generated from the notebooks; this currently includes a
modified version of ezgal.

The root [“nbs”
folder](https://github.com/IntraClusterLight/nicl/tree/main/nbs)
contains notebooks defining library functionality that should be of
general use in analysing ICL in a variety of datasets. Within that
folder are subfolders containing notebooks defining library
functionality tailored to specific datasets, e.g. Euclid. The notebooks
can also perform analysis steps, but not contribute functionality to the
nicl library. Many of the plots in the Euclid Collaboration: Bamford et
al. (2026) paper are created in “nbs/euclid/q1/data_processing.ipynb”.

This repository is made publicly available for transparency and
reproducibility, but it is a snapshot of work in progress and not
intended as a ready-to-use package. This will be improved in versions
accompanying future papers, e.g. based on the Euclid DR1 release. If you
are trying to reproduce the papers listed above, then the following
scripts give a outline of the steps required. If you encounter any
difficulties, please reach out to the [Nottingham ICL
team](mailto:icl-group@nottingham.ac.uk) and we will do our best to
help.

The files “scripts/v0.7/run_pipeline_nir.py” and “run_pipeline_vis.py”
download the necessary data, create the skyflats, perform the NIR
persistence correction, produce combined images for each observation
then measure some statistics. In practice, for large numbers of
observations if it better to run each step separately,
e.g. “scripts/get_all_nir.py”, “scripts/create_coarse_data.py”,
“scripts/do_persistence_correction.py”. Furthermore, in our Q1 papers we
use combined images centred on target clusters, created with
“scripts/stack_Q1.py”. The ICL measurements are performed by
“scripts/run_measure.py”. Typically each of these scripts was not run
directly, but submitted to a SLURM queue on an HPC system (ada). The
corresponding scripts are in “scripts/ada/”.

The statistics presented in the Euclid Collaboration: Bamford et
al. (2026) paper are measured on “skypatches”,created by the scripts in
“scripts/ada/skypatches” and measured by those in
“scripts/ada/measure_noise”. The creation and measurement of the mock
clusters is described in “scripts/ada/mock_clusters”, while measurements
of the simulated (Hydrangea) clusters were performed using
“scripts/ada/simulated_clusters”. Ablation tests to illustrate the
effect of each processing step were performed using the scripts in
“scripts/ada/illustration”.

## Installation

### Basic install

If you only want to use (not develop) the software, you can install it
(and its dependencies) into an environment by cloning this repository,
changing to the root repository folder, and running:

    pip install .

You will also need working installations of SWarp and AutoProf on your
path.

#### SWarp

If you are using a conda environment you can install SWarp with
`conda install conda-forge::astromatic-swarp`. Alternatively, see the
[SWarp homepage](https://www.astromatic.net/software/swarp/) for Linux
binaries or to build from source.

#### AutoProf

While AutoProf is a Python package, it currently (as of July 2026)
requires old versions of several key packages, e.g. photutils. To avoid
the same requirements for nicl, AutoProf is not included as a
dependency, but instead should be installed in a separate environment.
To achieve this, using conda, you can do the following

    conda create -y -n autoprof python=3.12
    conda activate autoprof
    pip install autoprof
    AUTOPROF=`which autoprof`
    conda deactivate

Then, activate the environment in which you have installed nicl,
e.g. `conda activate icl`, and create a symlink the main AutoProf script
in the binary folder, as follows:

    ln -sf $AUTOPROF $CONDA_PREFIX/bin/

### Development install

To install the software for development, first create a clean Python
(\>= 3.13) environment. This could be a virtualenv or a conda
environment (e.g. `conda create -n icl python=3.13`). Clone this
repository and change to the root repository folder. With your
environment activated (e.g. `conda activate icl`), install nicl and all
its dependencies with:

    pip install -e '.[dev]'

The `-e` here performs an ‘editable’ installation, i.e. the files in the
repository are used directly, rather than being copied to a central
location.

To run particular elements of the code you will also need to have SWarp
and/or AutoProf installed; see the instructions above.

The core code, documentation, tests and applications are written in
Jupyter notebooks. To faciliate this, the development of this software
uses [nbdev](https://nbdev.fast.ai). To understand this system, you must
familiarise yourself with the [introductory
walkthrough](https://nbdev.fast.ai/tutorials/tutorial.html).

To ensure the code committed to the repository is well-formatted and
correctly cleaned and exported, we use some git commit hooks. To enable
these run:

    pre-commit install

Now, whenever you try to commit to this repo, a set of checks will run.

#### Committing changes to git

Start a commit by doing `git add your_new_or_updated_notebooks.ipynb`.
Then run `git commit -m "Your informative log message"`. Typically the
notebook will be reformatted, cleaned and exported, and the checks will
fail. Next, do `git add your_new_or_updated_notebooks.ipynb` again, and
also add any new files that have been created in the `nicl` folder. You
might find `git add -u .` helpful, but be careful not to add any files
you have changed but don’t want to commit at this stage. Then run
`git commit -m "Your informative log message"` again. You will likely
need to go through this routine one more time, then the commit will
succeed. If it doesn’t, there may be a problem with your code, which you
will need to fix before commiting. If you get desperate, you can skip
the checks with `git commit -n`.
